FIP-0086: Fast Finality in Filecoin (#896)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-xxxx.md

---
fip: "<to be assigned>"

> title: Fast Finality in Filecoin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Fast Finality in Filecoin (F3)
```

we refer this to F3 quite a lot, adding it to the title so the term `F3` is  more well known

> author: Jie Hou (@mb1896), Alex North (@anorth), Matej Pavlovic (@matejpavlovic), Aayush Rajasekaran (@arajasek), Alejandro Ranchal-Pedrosa (@ranchalp), Jorge Soares (@jsoares) and Marko Vukolic (@vukolic)

Reviewer: whats about `@hmoniz`?

Author: I'll address the other comments when I'm back (thanks for the thorough review!) but, on this particular matter, it was based on my (mis-)reading of the [authorship rules](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0001.md#transferring-fip-ownership). I'll ask Henrique whether he wants to be listed -- absolutely no objection from my side.

Author: Checked & fixed in 9ad97ce63e4d37b60ed9077ecc0941a08b521e39.

discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/809
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-12-18
---

# Fast Finality in Filecoin

## Simple Summary

Filecoin clients currently consider blocks irreversible after 900 epochs, hindering applications requiring low latency. This FIP specifies Fast Finality in Filecoin (F3), extending the protocol with a new component that reduces finalization time from 7.5 hours to tens of seconds.

## Abstract

The current Filecoin consensus mechanism only provides probabilistic finality. To simplify client implementations and provide some form of determinism, the protocol also includes a soft finality threshold, whereby miners at round $N$ reject all blocks that fork off before $N-900$. This finalization delay of 900 epochs (7.5 hours) hinders user experience and limits applications built on Filecoin.

> We specify a mechanism for fast finality with the F3 component. F3 is expected to finalize tipsets within tens of seconds during regular network operation, compared to the current 900-epoch finalization delay. It does so by leveraging GossiPBFT, an optimally resilient partially synchronous BFT consensus protocol, which runs in parallel with the current protocol, taking EC tipsets as input and providing finalized prefixes as output. EC's fork choice rule is modified never to select away from the F3-finalized chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We specify a mechanism for fast finality with the F3 component. F3 is expected to finalize tipsets within tens of seconds during regular network operation, compared to the current 900-epoch finalization delay. It does so by leveraging GossiPBFT, an optimally resilient partially synchronous BFT consensus protocol, which runs in parallel with the current protocol, taking EC tipsets as input and providing finalized prefixes as output. The fork choice rule of EC is modified to ensure it never selects a chain other than the F3-finalized chain.
```

the senescence was reading a bit awkwardly for me.. and here's the chatgpt's suggestion 😸

## Change Motivation

> * The long time to finality on Filecoin mainnet restricts or severely affects applications built on Filecoin (e.g., IPC, FVM, Axelar, Wormhole, Glif, …).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The long time to finality on Filecoin mainnet restricts or severely affects applications built on Filecoin (e.g., IPC, Axelar, Wormhole, Glif, …).
```

removing given FVM itself is not an application (weird branding side effects..)

* Even though applications on Filecoin can set a lower finalization time than the built-in 900 epochs, delayed finalization for important transactions will require tens of minutes with a longest-chain protocol like Filecoin's Expected Consensus (EC).
* Long finalization times also affect exchanges, by imposing a long confirmation period (often more than 1 hour) for users managing their FIL assets, and bridges, which face extended wait times for asset transfers.
* Bridging to other systems is not currently fast, safe, and verifiable.

## Specification

### Background

> [Expected Consensus (EC)](https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/expected_consensus/) is the current mechanism by which participants in the Filecoin network reach an agreement on tipsets. A tipset is a set of blocks with the same epoch and the same set of parents. EC is a longest-chain protocol (more accurately, a heaviest-chain protocol) in which each participant independently builds the chain as it receives blocks from the network. Time is divided into slots of 30 seconds, called _epochs_. In each epoch, the protocol elects a set of network participants (i.e., storage providers) to become proposers. Each proposer can construct a new block and broadcast it to the network. On reception, each participant appends the block to its local view of the blockchain. Each tipset has a _weight_ corresponding to the total number of blocks in the path between the genesis and the tipset (the actual weight function is slightly more complex in reality, but this approximation is sufficient for this document). An example blockchain data structure is shown below, indicating the weight of each tipset in parentheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Expected Consensus (EC)](https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/expected_consensus/) is the current mechanism by which participants in the Filecoin network reach an agreement on tipsets. A tipset is a set of blocks with the same epoch and the same set of parents. EC is a longest-chain protocol (more accurately, a heaviest-chain protocol) in which each participant independently builds the chain as it receives blocks from the network. Time is divided into slots of 30 seconds, called _epochs_. In each epoch, the protocol elects a set of network participants (i.e., storage providers) to become block proposers. Each proposer can construct a new block and broadcast it to the network. On reception, each participant appends the block to its local view of the blockchain. Each tipset has a _weight_ corresponding to the total number of blocks in the path between the genesis and the tipset (the actual weight function is slightly more complex in reality, but this approximation is sufficient for this document). An example blockchain data structure is shown below, indicating the weight of each tipset in parentheses.
```

In EC and, generally, longest-chain protocols, the probability of a path from some tipset $h$ to the genesis tipset becoming finalized increases with the number of descendant tipsets of $h$. This happens because the weight of the heaviest chain increases the fastest, as the tipsets with the most new blocks are appended to it (assuming that honest participants form a majority). In the particular case of EC, in each epoch, most created blocks are expected to come from honest participants and thus extend the heaviest chain. Consequently, it becomes progressively harder for a different path to overcome that weight. Over time, the probability of a tipset never undergoing a reorganization becomes high enough that the tipset is considered final for all practical purposes. In the Filecoin network, a tipset that is part of the heaviest chain is considered final after 900 epochs (or, equivalently, 7.5 hours) from its proposal.

### F3 Overview and Interaction with EC

We propose implementing fast finality in Filecoin by introducing an F3 component, which works alongside EC in Filecoin client nodes (participants).

> The participants in F3 are the storage providers (SPs) of the Filecoin network. The participation of each SP is weighted according to its quality-adjusted power (QAP), which is a function of the storage that the SP has committed to the network. This information is maintained in a system actor called the _power table_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The participants in F3 are the storage providers (SPs) of the Filecoin network. The participation of each SP is weighted according to its quality-adjusted power (QAP), which is a function of the storage power that the SP has committed to the network. This information is maintained in a system actor called the _power actor_.
```

Reviewer: suggested to change `system actor` to `built-in actor` to avoid confusion with the actual builtin system actor (f00)

> The participants in F3 are the storage providers (SPs) of the Filecoin network. The participation of each SP is weighted according to its quality-adjusted power (QAP), which is a function of the storage that the SP has committed to the network. This information is maintained in a system actor called the _power table_.

Reviewer: To clarify, is only SPs thats eligible to mine (>100TiB in power table), eligible to participate in F3 as well?

Reviewer 2: Any participant holding power in the power table of EC is counted for the power table of F3. AFAIK this means any SP with >10TiB in the power table.

Author: I think you're talking about the same number. Eligibility is gated [the same as it is for EC](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/886020b7ed1d644c8f7aa0647cb27ae85221b4ca/build/params_mainnet.go#L111), i.e. 10TiB:

```
var ConsensusMinerMinPower = abi.NewStoragePower(10 << 40)
```

I'll add a note to the text.

> In short, each participant $p$ in the Filecoin network (i.e., a storage provider with power) runs F3 in a loop and feeds it input from EC. F3 returns a finalized prefix chain to EC, which updates the canonical chain to extend this F3-finalized prefix. More precisely, in each loop iteration $i$ (corresponding to the i-th instance of F3):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In short, each participant $p$ in the Filecoin network (i.e., a storage provider with power) runs F3 in a loop and feeds its input from EC. F3 returns a finalized prefix chain to EC, which updates the canonical chain to extend this F3-finalized prefix. More precisely, in each loop iteration $i$ (corresponding to the i-th instance of F3):
```

> In short, each participant $p$ in the Filecoin network (i.e., a storage provider with power) runs F3 in a loop and feeds it input from EC. F3 returns a finalized prefix chain to EC, which updates the canonical chain to extend this F3-finalized prefix. More precisely, in each loop iteration $i$ (corresponding to the i-th instance of F3):

Reviewer: can we expand on what does _F3 finalized_ mean?

Author: Possibly but no good explanation is coming to mind, other than the one that comes right below. Would you like to take a stab or provide a hint wrt what you think is unclear?

> - **EC/F3 interface:** Participant $p$ feeds its current canonical chain $canonical$ and its previously F3-finalized chain, which we call the $baseChain$, to F3. The $baseChain$ defines the power table and seeds randomness used to configure the F3 instance, while $p$'s current canonical chain is the chain $p$ proposes to be finalized. Periodically, $p$ also feeds to F3 tipset updates from EC that extend $p$'s canonical chain as EC delivers these tipsets.

Reviewer: >Periodically, $p$ also feeds to F3 tipset updates from EC that extend $p$'s canonical chain as EC delivers these tipsets.

for my understanding, does this happen every 30s, in the beginning/end of each epoch?

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily, as it can be that a participant delivers blocks/tipsets from the current epoch later than others (and particularly after having started the execution of the corresponding F3 instance). This relates to lines 54-55 in the pseudocode.

Author: Not sure if this requires clarifying in the text, but happy to add to it if so.

> - **F3 consensus:** F3 establishes network-wide consensus on finalized tipsets and produces a _Proof of Finality (PoF)_ for a tipset finalized in instance $i$, $t_i$. Every _PoF_ output by F3 is signed by ≥ ⅔ of the total QAP, i.e., a super-majority of the power table vouching that honest participants with more than ⅓ QAP consider tipset $t_i$ final.

Reviewer: where is the total QAP taken from, the base chain?

Reviewer 2: Yes:

> EC/F3 interface: Participant feeds its current canonical chain and its previously F3-finalized chain, which we call the , to F3. The defines the power table and seeds randomness used to configure the F3 instance, while 's current canonical chain is the chain proposes to be finalized

> - **F3 consensus:** F3 establishes network-wide consensus on finalized tipsets and produces a _Proof of Finality (PoF)_ for a tipset finalized in instance $i$, $t_i$. Every _PoF_ output by F3 is signed by ≥ ⅔ of the total QAP, i.e., a super-majority of the power table vouching that honest participants with more than ⅓ QAP consider tipset $t_i$ final.

Reviewer: > .. that honest participants with more than ⅓ QAP consider tipset $t_i$ final.

should it be ⅔ if I werent mistaken?

Reviewer 2: More than 2/3 QAP of which more than 1/3 is QAP from honest participants.

Author: The current text is accurate and complete. I wouldn't make any changes unless we think it's confusing.

- **EC:** Participant $p$ updates its local EC chain and commits not to reorganize the finalized tipset $t_i$, i.e., the tipset must stay in $p$'s EC canonical chain for good. Apart from this change, EC continues operating as it currently does. In particular, EC still does a 900-epoch lookback for its power table and continues operating “normally” if F3 assumptions are violated and F3 halts, with the combined EC/F3 protocol favoring availability over consistency (in CAP theorem parlance).
- **F3 synchronization:** Participants disseminate information about finalized tipset $t_i$ and its proof $PoF_i$ to all other participants, light clients, and smart contracts. The main goal of F3 synchronization is to allow an external party (or a lagging F3 participant) to fetch a sequence of messages that prove the finality of some recent final tipset. The sequence demonstrates a chain of eligible participants deciding on a final tipset and, thus, the eligible power table for the next round. Verifying the finality of a tipset from genesis does not require validating the EC chain.

> 

Reviewer: are selected block producers for each round are required to participate in BOTH ec & f3 protocol at the same time? or EC & F3 participants at the same epoch two separate set?

Author: Likewise, I don't think we ever suggest they are the same. If you feel like people will read it implicitly, then let's adjust the text to add this note.

Reviewer: I was taking the "if im an implementer, can I implement this by just reading the spec and sync the chain" approach when reading through this - while I don't think the fip suggests they are the same, but at the same time it doesn't specify what the set should be. maybe its more obvious to people who has more context?

Author: One option would be to write

> - **EC/F3 interface:** Participant $p$ feeds its current canonical chain $canonical$ and its previously F3-finalized chain, which we call the $baseChain$, to F3. The $baseChain$ defines the power table **used by F3** and seeds randomness used to configure the F3 instance, while $p$'s current canonical chain is the chain $p$ proposes to be finalized. Periodically, $p$ also feeds to F3 tipset updates from EC that extend $p$'s canonical chain as EC delivers these tipsets.

> In particular, EC still does a 900-epoch lookback for its power table **(which can therefore differ from the one used by F3)** and continues operating “normally” if F3 assumptions are violated and F3 halts, with the combined EC/F3 protocol favoring availability over consistency (in CAP theorem parlance).

Would this be clear enough?

![](../resources/fip-xxxx/flow.png)

### F3 Adversarial Model

> Honest participants follow the protocol at all times. Byzantine participants deviate arbitrarily from the protocol. Rational participants deviate from the protocol to pursue a greater (expected) pay-off according to their utility function. We consider a Byzantine adversary able to control and orchestrate up to less than ⅓ QAP.

Reviewer: to confirm, for any participants thats has equal or larger than 1/3 QAP are disqualified from participating in F3?

Reviewer 2: This is rather an assumption that something we enforce (or something we can enforce). Disqualifying a participant that holds 1/3 QAP or more from participating in F3 serves no purpose: the participant can always perform a 'sybil-like' workaround by dividing its QAP into multiple identities each holding less than 1/3. We just make it a requirement for the properties we ensure that Byzantine participants hold less than 1/3 QAP.

F3 and its implementation GossiPBFT provide additional robustness for strong adversaries that control more than ⅓ QAP, such as:

* Censorship resistance against a coalition of rational participants trying to leak power, without providing firm guarantees.
* Resilience to long-range attacks by an adversary controlling up to less than ⅔ QAP of any old power table.

### Best-effort Broadcast and Gossipsub

F3 uses GossipSub (like Filecoin EC) to disseminate protocol messages, implementing a broadcast channel among participants. We assume and model GossipSub to satisfy the following properties of the _best-effort broadcast primitive_ (denoted _BEBroadcast_ hereafter):

* If $p$ and $p'$ are honest, then every message broadcast by $p$ is eventually delivered by $p'$.
* No message with sender $p$ is delivered unless it was previously broadcast by $p$.

### Partially Synchronous Model and Δ-Synchrony

> We say the system is $\Delta$-_synchronous_ if the combined computation and communication delay between any two honest participants is smaller than $\Delta$. We assume that, under $\Delta$-synchrony, any message broadcast by an honest participant is delivered by every honest participant within a time bound of $\Delta$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We say the system is $\Delta$-_synchronous_ if the combined computation and communication delay between any two honest participants is smaller than $\Delta$. We assume that, under $\Delta$-synchrony, any message broadcasted by an honest participant is delivered by every honest participant within a time bound of $\Delta$.
```

Author: I'm going to object here :)

https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/is-it-broadcast-or-broadcasted-forecast-or-forecasted-usage

For termination, we assume a classical partially synchronous model with an unknown bound on communication delays among non-Byzantine participants.

### Properties of F3

F3 is not identical to classical consensus, however similar to it. In a nutshell, the reasons why EC and Filecoin should not rely on classical consensus properties (implemented by existing off-the-shelf BFT consensus protocol) for fast finality are twofold: EC incentive compatibility and resilience to Filecoin power leakage attacks in case of a strong adversary. 

With this in mind, the F3 component interface and properties are given below.

> **Interface and properties of F3 at participant p:**
>
> `F3.invoke (int i, chain canonical, chain baseChain)` **returns** (we say finalizes) `(int i, chain h, proof_of_finality PoF)`
>
> **Properties:**
>
> **Agreement.** If two honest participants finalize $(i,h,\ast)$ and $(i,h',\ast)$, then $h = h'$.
>
> **Validity.** If an honest participant finalizes $(i,h,\ast)$, then $h$ is a prefix of the canonical input chain of some honest participant $p'$ in instance $i$.
>

> > **Proof of Finality.** If an honest participant finalizes $(i,h,PoF)$, then $PoF$ is signed by ⅔ QAP majority corresponding to the $\texttt{PowerTable}(baseChain)'$ input in instance $i$ of some honest participant $p'$.

Reviewer: (for my understanding: is the honest participant in this step the same in the validity step?

Reviewer 2: These are not steps but properties. Two distinct honest participants, p and p', can finalize the same (i, h, *)  where * is PoF and PoF' respectively, such that the 2/3 QAP majority of PoF and PoF' does not exactly match. But that is ok: both PoF and PoF' are correct and both ensure at least 1/3 QAP from honest participants.

We achieve this by adjusting the definition of weight for a finalized prefix: the heaviest finalized chain is the one that **matches exactly the tipsets finalized by F3**, in that a tipset $t'$ that is a superset of finalized tipset $t$ in the same epoch is not heavier than $t$ itself, despite it being backed by more EC power.

This redefinition of the heaviest chain is consistent with the abstract notion of the heaviest chain being backed by the most power because a finalized tipset has been backed by a super-majority of participants in GossiPBFT. In contrast, any non-finalized block in the same epoch is only backed in that epoch by the EC proposer.

We illustrate the updated rule in the following figure, where blocks in blue are finalized blocks, and all blocks are assumed to be proposed by a proposer holding only one EC ticket (the weight of a chain is the number of blocks):

![](../resources/fip-xxxx/fork.png)

> The current EC fork-choice rule would select the tipset $\lbrace D_0, D_1\rbrace$ as the head of the heaviest chain. However, the heaviest finalized tipset is $\lbrace C_3\rbrace$, which is not an ancestor of $\lbrace D_0, D_1\rbrace$. Therefore, the new fork choice rule selects $\lbrace D_3\rbrace$ as the head of the heaviest chain. The reason why $D_4$ is not selected is that its parent tipset does not exactly match the finalized tipset $\lbrace C_3\rbrace$, but a superset of it, i.e. $\lbrace C_3, C_4\rbrace$.

Reviewer 3: I remember we discussed that EC should work as it did previously in case f3 fails for some reason. And I guess it will, once F3 stops finalizing - the EC will further do it's choices as it did pre-F3, given that the prefix is the latest `f3-finalized` chain. Correct? Perhaps worth mentioning here.

Reviewer 2: That's correct

Author: ```suggestion
The current EC fork-choice rule would select the tipset $\lbrace D_0, D_1\rbrace$ as the head of the heaviest chain. However, the heaviest finalized tipset is $\lbrace C_3\rbrace$, which is not an ancestor of $\lbrace D_0, D_1\rbrace$. Therefore, the new fork choice rule selects $\lbrace D_3\rbrace$ as the head of the heaviest chain. The reason why $D_4$ is not selected is that its parent tipset does not exactly match the finalized tipset $\lbrace C_3\rbrace$, but a superset of it, i.e. $\lbrace C_3, C_4\rbrace$.

In the event that F3 halts, the fork choice rule allows EC to continue to progress, building a chain of unbounded length, per the current rules, on the last F3-finalized prefix.
```

@ruseinov @ranchalp would this be clear?

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me.

### Bootstrapping

> Integrating F3 into Filecoin follows the usual path for Filecoin upgrades. One epoch, $upgradeEpoch$, will be defined as the target epoch upon which participants upgrade Filecoin. Then, every participant starts the first instance with the tipset at the $upgradeEpoch$ minus the 900-epoch lookback as the head tipset of the first $baseChain$, which is assumed by design to be common to all participants.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by implied?

> Integrating F3 into Filecoin follows the usual path for Filecoin upgrades. One epoch, $upgradeEpoch$, will be defined as the target epoch upon which participants upgrade Filecoin. Then, every participant starts the first instance with the tipset at the $upgradeEpoch$ minus the 900-epoch lookback as the head tipset of the first $baseChain$, which is assumed by design to be common to all participants.

Reviewer 3: I mean when it's said `first instance` what's actually meant is `first instance of F3`.

> Integrating F3 into Filecoin follows the usual path for Filecoin upgrades. One epoch, $upgradeEpoch$, will be defined as the target epoch upon which participants upgrade Filecoin. Then, every participant starts the first instance with the tipset at the $upgradeEpoch$ minus the 900-epoch lookback as the head tipset of the first $baseChain$, which is assumed by design to be common to all participants.

Author: Fixed in 40fa4f1

          until timeout expires
23:       value ← LowestTicketProposal(M)  \* leader election
24:       if value ∈ ECCompatibleChains   \* see also lines 54-57
25:         proposal ← value \* we sway proposal if the value is EC compatible
26:       else
27:         value ← 丄 \* vote for not deciding in this round

28:     BEBroadcast <PREPARE, value, round>; trigger(timeout)
29:     collect a clean set M of valid <PREPARE, proposal, round> msgs \* match PREPARE value against local proposal
        until Power(M) > ⅔ OR timeout expires
30:     if (Power(M)>⅔)  \* strong quorum of PREPAREs for local proposal
31:       value ← proposal \* vote for deciding proposal (COMMIT)
32:       evidence ← Aggregate(M) \* strong quorum of PREPAREs is evidence
33:     else
34:       value ← 丄 \* vote for not deciding in this round
35:       evidence ← nil

36:     BEBroadcast <COMMIT, value, evidence, round>; trigger(timeout)
37:     collect a clean set M of valid COMMIT messages from this round
        until (HasStrongQuorumValue(M) AND StrongQuorumValue(M) ≠ 丄)
          OR (timeout expires AND Power(M)>2/3)
38:     if (HasStrongQuorumValue(M) AND StrongQuorumValue(M) ≠ 丄)    \* decide

> 39:       BEBroadcast <DECIDE, StrongQuorumValue(M)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
39:       BEBroadcast <DECIDE, StrongQuorumValue(M)>
```

40:       decideSent ← True
40:     if (∃ m ∈ M: m.value ≠ 丄) \* m.value was possibly decided by others
41:       proposal ← m.value; \* sway local proposal to possibly decided value
42:       evidence ← m.evidence \* strong PREPARE quorum is inherited evidence
43:     else \* no participant decided in this round
44:       evidence ← Aggregate(M) \* strong quorum of COMMITs for 丄 is evidence
45:     round ← round + 1;
46:     timeout ← updateTimeout(timeout, round)
47:   }  \*end while

48:   collect a clean set M of DECIDE messages
      until (HasStrongQuorumValue(M)) \* Collect a strong quorum of decide outside the round loop

> 49:   return (StrongQuorumValue(M))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
49:   return (StrongQuorumValue(M), Aggregate())
```

This must have been just a mistake when porting the document between various formats. The `Aggregate(M)` return value is required as a `PoF`. The function signature already says so.
